README.md, before:

# Physical Laws of Form

**Lean 4 formalization of Spencer-Brown's distinction extended to physics and computation**

[![Lean](https://img.shields.io/badge/Lean-4.27-blue)](https://lean-lang.org/)
[![Mathlib](https://img.shields.io/badge/Mathlib-latest-purple)](https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib4)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green)](LICENSE)

## Overview

This repository contains machine-verified proofs that **distinction [A,B] ≠ 0 is the foundation of all structure** — from logic to physics to computation.

### Core Claims (Proven)

1. **Non-commutativity is necessary for existence** (Master Necessity Theorem)
2. **If nothing is distinguishable, the universe collapses** (Indistinguishability Collapse)
3. **Distinction is the optimal foundation** (Foundation Limit Theorem)
4. **All impossibility theorems presuppose distinction** (Gödel, Turing, Heisenberg)

## Attribution

This work extends **George Spencer-Brown's *Laws of Form* (1969)**.

> "We take as given the idea of distinction and the idea of indication, 
> and that we cannot make an indication without drawing a distinction."
> — Spencer-Brown (1969)

---

## The Hierarchy of Structure

```
Level 0: VOID                    (nothing)
    ↓
Level 1: DISTINCTION             [A, B] ≠ 0 — objects exist, can be told apart
    ↓
Level 2: TRANSFORMATION          f : A → B — can move between objects  
    ↓
Level 3: NON-COMMUTATIVITY       [f, g] ≠ 0 — order matters
    ↓
Level 4: PHYSICS                 Lie algebras, gauge theory, quantum mechanics
```

Each level requires the previous. This is the structure of reality.

---

## Current Status

| Level | Concept | File | Status |
|-------|---------|------|--------|
| 1 | Distinction | `Foundations/Distinction.lean` | ✅ Complete |
| 1 | Indistinguishability Collapse | `Foundations/Collapse.lean` | ✅ Complete |
| 1 | Master Necessity | `Foundations/Existence.lean` | ✅ Complete |
| 1 | Foundation Limit | `Foundations/Optimality.lean` | ✅ Complete |
| 1 | Laws of Form | `Foundations/LawsOfForm.lean` | ✅ Complete |
| 2 | Transformation | `Foundations/Transformation.lean` | ✅ Complete |
| - | Impossibility Theorems | `ImpossibilityTheorems.lean` | ✅ Complete |

---

## Roadmap

### Phase 1: Foundations ✅ DONE
- [x] Distinction as primitive
- [x] Collapse theorem
- [x] Master necessity theorem
- [x] Foundation limit theorem
- [x] Spencer-Brown's Laws (Calling, Crossing)
- [x] Transformation and morphisms
- [x] Non-commutativity definition

### Phase 2: Set Theory 🔶 IN PROGRESS
- [ ] ZFC axioms require distinction (∈ vs ∉)
- [ ] Axiom of Choice and consequences
- [ ] Vitali sets: non-measurable constructions
- [ ] Connection: Set membership IS distinction

### Phase 3: Analysis 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] Limits as distinction convergence (lim = approaching distinction)
- [ ] Continuity as distinction-preserving maps
- [ ] Derivatives as infinitesimal distinction (df/dx)
- [ ] Integration as accumulated distinction
- [ ] Connection: Calculus IS the study of changing distinctions

### Phase 4: Measure Theory 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] Lebesgue measure as size-distinction function
- [ ] Measurable vs non-measurable sets
- [ ] Vitali set: escapes size-distinction
- [ ] σ-algebras as distinguished collections
- [ ] Connection: Measurement IS a form of distinction

### Phase 5: Topology 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] Open/closed sets as distinguished regions
- [ ] Separation axioms (T0, T1, Hausdorff)
- [ ] Hausdorff = points distinguishable by neighborhoods
- [ ] Homotopy groups: π₁ distinguishes loops
- [ ] Connection: Topology IS distinguishable neighborhoods

### Phase 6: Differential Geometry 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] Manifolds as locally distinguished patches
- [ ] Curvature = [parallel transport] ≠ identity
- [ ] Ricci flow: dg/dt = -2 Ric (distinction evolves!)
- [ ] **Poincaré conjecture**: simply connected 3-manifolds → S³
- [ ] General Relativity from spacetime distinction
- [ ] Connection: Geometry IS curvature-distinction

### Phase 7: Number Theory 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] Primes vs composites: [prime, composite] ≠ 0
- [ ] Prime factorization as distinction structure
- [ ] Riemann hypothesis: zeros distinguish prime distribution
- [ ] Modular arithmetic: equivalence classes
- [ ] Connection: Number theory IS arithmetic distinction

### Phase 8: Category Theory 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] Objects = distinguished entities
- [ ] Morphisms = transformations (Level 2)
- [ ] Functors preserve distinction structure
- [ ] Natural transformations
- [ ] Connection: Categories formalize distinction + transformation

### Phase 9: Homological Algebra 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] Chain complexes as distinguished sequences
- [ ] Homology groups measure "holes"
- [ ] Cohomology as obstruction to distinction
- [ ] Exact sequences: distinction propagation
- [ ] Connection: Homology IS algebraic distinction-counting

### Phase 10: Group Theory 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] Group elements are distinguished
- [ ] Group operations are morphisms
- [ ] Rubik's cube: non-abelian group
- [ ] Lie groups: continuous symmetries
- [ ] Connection: Symmetry requires [before, after] distinction

### Phase 11: Lie Algebras 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] Lie bracket [X, Y] = XY - YX
- [ ] su(2) from Pauli matrices
- [ ] su(3) from Gell-Mann matrices (quarks!)
- [ ] Representation theory
- [ ] Connection: Lie bracket IS infinitesimal distinction

### Phase 12: Quantum Mechanics 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] Quantum states as distinguished vectors
- [ ] Observables from [x̂, p̂] = iℏ
- [ ] Heisenberg uncertainty as distinction limit
- [ ] Superposition: distinguished basis states
- [ ] Connection: QM IS applied non-commutativity

### Phase 13: Gauge Theory & Standard Model 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] Gauge groups SU(3) × SU(2) × U(1)
- [ ] Quarks as SU(3) representations
- [ ] Forces from gauge symmetry breaking
- [ ] Higgs mechanism
- [ ] Connection: Particles ARE Lie algebra manifestations

### Phase 14: Complexity Theory 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] P vs NP as distinction complexity
- [ ] DLA dimension → trainability
- [ ] BQP from quantum [A,B] ≠ 0
- [ ] Kolmogorov complexity
- [ ] Connection: Computational power FROM [A,B] structure

### Phase 15: Integration & Publication 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] Connect to `Lean-QuantumInfo`
- [ ] Connect to `FormalizedFormalLogic/Foundation`
- [ ] Upstream contributions to Mathlib
- [ ] Peer-reviewed publication

---

## Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/poig/Lean-physical-laws-of-form.git
cd Lean-physical-laws-of-form

# Download Mathlib cache
lake exe cache get

# Build
lake build
```

## Project Structure

```
Lean-physical-laws-of-form/
├── PhysicalLoF/
│   ├── Foundations/
│   │   ├── Distinction.lean      # Level 1: [A,B] ≠ 0
│   │   ├── Collapse.lean         # Level 1: Indistinguishability → singleton
│   │   ├── Existence.lean        # Level 1: Master Necessity
│   │   ├── Optimality.lean       # Level 1: Foundation Limit Theorem
│   │   ├── LawsOfForm.lean       # Level 1: Spencer-Brown's Laws
│   │   └── Transformation.lean   # Level 2: Morphisms, f : A → B
│   └── ImpossibilityTheorems.lean # Gödel, Turing, Heisenberg
├── PhysicalLoF.lean              # Main library entry
├── Main.lean                     # Executable entry
├── lakefile.lean                 # Build configuration (Mathlib)
└── lean-toolchain                # Lean 4.27
```

---

## Key Theorems

| Theorem | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `master_necessity` | Nontrivial type ⟹ ∃ distinguishable elements |
| `indistinguishability_collapse` | No distinction ⟹ Subsingleton |
| `distinction_is_optimal` | Distinction is the minimal foundation |
| `foundation_limit` | Optimal foundation exists |
| `law_of_calling` | Mark · Mark = Mark |
| `law_of_crossing` | Cross(Cross(x)) = x |
| `distinction_meta_foundation` | All impossibility theorems require distinction |
| `noncommuting_distinguishable` | [f,g] ≠ 0 ⟹ f∘g ≠ g∘f are distinguishable |

---

## Philosophy: Engineering Theory of Everything

This project embodies an **honest** approach to foundations:

1. **We admit no complete ToE can exist** (Gödel, observer inclusion)
2. **We prove this is unknowable** (Foundation Limit Theorem)
3. **We identify the optimal approximation** (Distinction)
4. **We machine-verify everything** (Lean 4)
5. **We asymptotically improve** (open source, collaborative)

---

## References

- Spencer-Brown, G. (1969). *Laws of Form*. London: Allen & Unwin.
- Kauffman, L. (1987). *Self-reference and recursive forms*.
- Meiburg, A. (2024). *Quantum Information in Lean*. GitHub.
- Saito, S. (2024). *Formalized Formal Logic*. GitHub.

---

## License

MIT License - Copyright (c) 2026 Tan Jun Liang

## Contributing

Contributions welcome! Especially:
- Category theory formalizations
- Lie algebra and group theory
- Physics interpretations
- Complexity theory connections

Commit message:

meta-distinction(what is time)

README.md, after:

# Physical Laws of Form

**Lean 4 formalization of Spencer-Brown's distinction extended to physics and computation**

[![Lean](https://img.shields.io/badge/Lean-4.27-blue)](https://lean-lang.org/)
[![Mathlib](https://img.shields.io/badge/Mathlib-latest-purple)](https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib4)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green)](LICENSE)

## Overview

This repository contains machine-verified proofs that **distinction [A,B] ≠ 0 is the foundation of all structure** — from logic to physics to computation.

### Core Claims (Proven)

1. **Non-commutativity is necessary for existence** (Master Necessity Theorem)
2. **If nothing is distinguishable, the universe collapses** (Indistinguishability Collapse)
3. **Distinction is the optimal foundation** (Foundation Limit Theorem)
4. **All impossibility theorems presuppose distinction** (Gödel, Turing, Heisenberg)

## Attribution

This work extends **George Spencer-Brown's *Laws of Form* (1969)**.

> "We take as given the idea of distinction and the idea of indication, 
> and that we cannot make an indication without drawing a distinction."
> — Spencer-Brown (1969)

---

## The Hierarchy of Structure

```
Level 0:   VOID
    ↓
Level 1:   DISTINCTION             [A, B] ≠ 0 — The Primitive
    ↓
Level 2:   META-DISTINCTION        Constraint on Distinction  ← UNIFIED!
           - Time (Causal constraint)
           - Space (Locality constraint)
           - Complexity (Resource constraint)
           - Observability (Structural constraint)
    ↓
Level 3:   TRANSFORMATION          f : A → B
    ↓
Level 4:   NON-COMMUTATIVITY       [f, g] ≠ 0
    ↓
Level 5:   PHYSICS                 Standard Model, QFT, GR
```

**Key Insight:** Time, Space, and Complexity are not separate things. They are all **Constraints** on the primitive act of distinction.

---

## Current Status

| Level | Concept | File | Status |
|-------|---------|------|--------|
| 1 | Distinction | `Foundations/Distinction.lean` | ✅ Complete |
| 2 | **Meta-Distinction** | `Foundations/MetaDistinction.lean` | ✅ UNIFIED |
| 3 | Transformation | `Foundations/Transformation.lean` | ✅ Complete |
| 1 | Indistinguishability Collapse | `Foundations/Collapse.lean` | ✅ Complete |
| 1 | Master Necessity | `Foundations/Existence.lean` | ✅ Complete |
| 1 | Laws of Form | `Foundations/LawsOfForm.lean` | ✅ Complete |
| - | Impossibility Theorems | `ImpossibilityTheorems.lean` | ✅ Complete |

---

## Roadmap

### Phase 1: Foundations ✅ DONE
- [x] Distinction as primitive
- [x] Collapse theorem
- [x] Master necessity theorem
- [x] Foundation limit theorem
- [x] Spencer-Brown's Laws (Calling, Crossing)
- [x] Transformation and morphisms
- [x] Non-commutativity definition

### Phase 2: Set Theory 🔶 IN PROGRESS
- [ ] ZFC axioms require distinction (∈ vs ∉)
- [ ] Axiom of Choice and consequences
- [ ] Vitali sets: non-measurable constructions
- [ ] Connection: Set membership IS distinction

### Phase 3: Analysis 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] Limits as distinction convergence (lim = approaching distinction)
- [ ] Continuity as distinction-preserving maps
- [ ] Derivatives as infinitesimal distinction (df/dx)
- [ ] Integration as accumulated distinction
- [ ] Connection: Calculus IS the study of changing distinctions

### Phase 4: Measure Theory 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] Lebesgue measure as size-distinction function
- [ ] Measurable vs non-measurable sets
- [ ] Vitali set: escapes size-distinction
- [ ] σ-algebras as distinguished collections
- [ ] Connection: Measurement IS a form of distinction

### Phase 5: Topology 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] Open/closed sets as distinguished regions
- [ ] Separation axioms (T0, T1, Hausdorff)
- [ ] Hausdorff = points distinguishable by neighborhoods
- [ ] Homotopy groups: π₁ distinguishes loops
- [ ] Connection: Topology IS distinguishable neighborhoods

### Phase 6: Differential Geometry 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] Manifolds as locally distinguished patches
- [ ] Curvature = [parallel transport] ≠ identity
- [ ] Ricci flow: dg/dt = -2 Ric (distinction evolves!)
- [ ] **Poincaré conjecture**: simply connected 3-manifolds → S³
- [ ] General Relativity from spacetime distinction
- [ ] Connection: Geometry IS curvature-distinction

### Phase 7: Number Theory 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] Primes vs composites: [prime, composite] ≠ 0
- [ ] Prime factorization as distinction structure
- [ ] Riemann hypothesis: zeros distinguish prime distribution
- [ ] Modular arithmetic: equivalence classes
- [ ] Connection: Number theory IS arithmetic distinction

### Phase 8: Category Theory 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] Objects = distinguished entities
- [ ] Morphisms = transformations (Level 2)
- [ ] Functors preserve distinction structure
- [ ] Natural transformations
- [ ] Connection: Categories formalize distinction + transformation

### Phase 9: Homological Algebra 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] Chain complexes as distinguished sequences
- [ ] Homology groups measure "holes"
- [ ] Cohomology as obstruction to distinction
- [ ] Exact sequences: distinction propagation
- [ ] Connection: Homology IS algebraic distinction-counting

### Phase 10: Group Theory 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] Group elements are distinguished
- [ ] Group operations are morphisms
- [ ] Rubik's cube: non-abelian group
- [ ] Lie groups: continuous symmetries
- [ ] Connection: Symmetry requires [before, after] distinction

### Phase 11: Lie Algebras 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] Lie bracket [X, Y] = XY - YX
- [ ] su(2) from Pauli matrices
- [ ] su(3) from Gell-Mann matrices (quarks!)
- [ ] Representation theory
- [ ] Connection: Lie bracket IS infinitesimal distinction

### Phase 12: Quantum Mechanics 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] Quantum states as distinguished vectors
- [ ] Observables from [x̂, p̂] = iℏ
- [ ] Heisenberg uncertainty as distinction limit
- [ ] Superposition: distinguished basis states
- [ ] Connection: QM IS applied non-commutativity

### Phase 13: Gauge Theory & Standard Model 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] Gauge groups SU(3) × SU(2) × U(1)
- [ ] Quarks as SU(3) representations
- [ ] Forces from gauge symmetry breaking
- [ ] Higgs mechanism
- [ ] Connection: Particles ARE Lie algebra manifestations

### Phase 14: Complexity Theory 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] P vs NP as distinction complexity
- [ ] DLA dimension → trainability
- [ ] BQP from quantum [A,B] ≠ 0
- [ ] Kolmogorov complexity
- [ ] Connection: Computational power FROM [A,B] structure

### Phase 15: Integration & Publication 🔶 PLANNED
- [ ] Connect to `Lean-QuantumInfo`
- [ ] Connect to `FormalizedFormalLogic/Foundation`
- [ ] Upstream contributions to Mathlib
- [ ] Peer-reviewed publication

---

## Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/poig/Lean-physical-laws-of-form.git
cd Lean-physical-laws-of-form

# Download Mathlib cache
lake exe cache get

# Build
lake build
```

## Project Structure

```
Lean-physical-laws-of-form/
├── PhysicalLoF/
│   ├── Foundations/
│   │   ├── Distinction.lean      # Level 1: [A,B] ≠ 0
│   │   ├── Collapse.lean         # Level 1: Indistinguishability → singleton
│   │   ├── Existence.lean        # Level 1: Master Necessity
│   │   ├── Optimality.lean       # Level 1: Foundation Limit Theorem
│   │   ├── LawsOfForm.lean       # Level 1: Spencer-Brown's Laws
│   │   └── Transformation.lean   # Level 2: Morphisms, f : A → B
│   └── ImpossibilityTheorems.lean # Gödel, Turing, Heisenberg
├── PhysicalLoF.lean              # Main library entry
├── Main.lean                     # Executable entry
├── lakefile.lean                 # Build configuration (Mathlib)
└── lean-toolchain                # Lean 4.27
```

---

## Key Theorems

| Theorem | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `master_necessity` | Nontrivial type ⟹ ∃ distinguishable elements |
| `indistinguishability_collapse` | No distinction ⟹ Subsingleton |
| `distinction_is_optimal` | Distinction is the minimal foundation |
| `foundation_limit` | Optimal foundation exists |
| `law_of_calling` | Mark · Mark = Mark |
| `law_of_crossing` | Cross(Cross(x)) = x |
| `distinction_meta_foundation` | All impossibility theorems require distinction |
| `noncommuting_distinguishable` | [f,g] ≠ 0 ⟹ f∘g ≠ g∘f are distinguishable |

---

## Philosophy: Engineering Theory of Everything

This project embodies an **honest** approach to foundations:

1. **We admit no complete ToE can exist** (Gödel, observer inclusion)
2. **We prove this is unknowable** (Foundation Limit Theorem)
3. **We identify the optimal approximation** (Distinction)
4. **We machine-verify everything** (Lean 4)
5. **We asymptotically improve** (open source, collaborative)

---

## References

- Spencer-Brown, G. (1969). *Laws of Form*. London: Allen & Unwin.
- Kauffman, L. (1987). *Self-reference and recursive forms*.
- Meiburg, A. (2024). *Quantum Information in Lean*. GitHub.
- Saito, S. (2024). *Formalized Formal Logic*. GitHub.

---

## License

MIT License - Copyright (c) 2026 Tan Jun Liang

## Contributing

Contributions welcome! Especially:
- Category theory formalizations
- Lie algebra and group theory
- Physics interpretations
- Complexity theory connections
